Oh, welcome.
Good. Good to see back, Jeff. Good to see you back.
Thank, um, and your team as well.
Um, so we've got, we've got you here for an hour.
Uh, we know that we'll occupy every, every moment of that,
I'm sure, with questions and, and, and good answers.
But if you want to, um, lead off with anything,
probably be particularly good to include, I'm sure you will,
anyway, how you're progressing with the,
um, the national plan.
Um, because I think your deadline is, you were going
for was this month, but is it early next year now? Yeah.
We'll be, um, providing it
to the minister at the end of December.
End of December. Just prior to Christmas. Yeah.
Oh, Christmas present. Yep. Cool. Okay. Right.
Anyway, in your hands for say five
or six minutes and then we'll go.
Sure. So you know who we are, and I've got Jeff
and I've got the team with us.
Um, financially, uh, we are doing quite well.
We have a very modest, uh, appropriation
of less than $13 million.
Uh, but we have managed well with that.
We here are continuing to see a reduction in outsourcing.
I using consultants and doing more work in-house.
We hope over the next three years we'll reduce our, um,
consulting costs by about 60%.
That's been a focus to meet the, uh, restraint
that we've got on financials, as you've just mentioned.
Uh, the national infrastructure plan has been the focus
for us all this year.
The draft was submitted after we had some consultation.
Uh, we expecting we've got that.
We've received the minister's comments
and the document is being finalized
before Christmas for the minister to introduce
to Parliament in the new year.
Um, other than that, we've been working with N FCO and CID
and Treasury 'cause there's been a little bit of change,
as you can imagine, bedding in by the
different organizations to make sure
that collectively we deliver
to the expectations on infrastructure for New Zealand.
But I think on that, I would
give you the time to ask questions.
Great. Okay. What you need. Okay.
Well, look, um, can I, um, just start off with one,
which is in terms of the content of the plan.
So, you know, all
looking forward to seeing what it looks like.
But, um, the, the, the draft one was a quite a limited suite
of, um, of projects that you obviously go,
well, we know these ones.
Um, it was a very high defense component of them.
Um, but sure. You know,
clearly quite clearly it wasn't a picture of the, um,
of the expectations as a whole.
What's it looking like now in terms of the level
of engagement you've got across the various different, um,
infrastructure providing sectors,
and so how good a snapshot is that gonna provide us?
Yeah, so talking about sort of the project level
of the plan, and I think it, it, the project level, um,
I think is, is needs to be set
alongside the forward guidance, uh, which is our assessment
of, uh, levels of spending,
which is sustainable over the long term.
So there are two kind of parts to the project level advice.
The first is, um, the national infrastructure pipeline,
which is best thought of as a comprehensive set of options
of all projects that are in planning in New Zealand.
Um, the number of projects that we now track is, uh,
above 12,000.
Most of those are very small projects.
I think 98% of them are less than a hundred million dollars.
Um, and that I think, gives New Zealand a very good sense
of all of the things that are in planning
and a good sense of what we mean when we
refer to infrastructure.
Um, my assessment of the coverage of that pipeline is
that it is as good,
if not better than any other national
pipelines I've seen around the world.
Um, often make the comparison with the uk, uh, where,
where our pipeline is about half the size,
but we're obviously, they're 10 times larger than us.
So in terms of coverage, we're seeing, uh, we're seeing a,
a very good proportion of everything
that's going on out there in terms of the commission's own,
um, uh, assessment of projects you should differentiate
between the pipeline,
which we're not providing an assessment of.
We're simply pulling together information from asset owners
and the infrastructure priorities program,
which is the commission's, uh, assessment of, um,
the readiness of those projects.
As you have alluded to in round one of that, um,
I think we had in the order of 19 projects
that were endorsed on that list, uh, round two, we will be,
um, putting the results of, uh, in the next few days.
So you'll see that prior to the delivery of the plan.
Um, that's an ongoing process.
Um, so again,
I don't think it will be necessarily representative, um, uh,
of, um, you know, what a, what a comprehensive list would be
because again, same as round one, um,
some agencies haven't been in, in the position
to send us their business cases.
Um, so that's something that, uh, as I alluded to last year,
I would expect, um, it to take a few years to get a,
a more sort of comprehensive list for the IPP.
Um, I, I suppose the, the last piece
of project level advice we will be giving in the,
in the plan is, uh,
timing advice on projects.
We, we know that we have more projects, uh, in the pipeline
that we want to fund than we have the capacity to fund.
We've talked, uh, uh, uh,
previously about our four guidance being within a band
to provide, um, let's say contestability on levels
of expenditure.
Um, but even if you take that ban further out, you see
that you have a prioritization problem.
Um, and so we will be providing, um, project level advice,
particularly in the area of transportation,
which says if you wanna stay within that band, here's kind
of what a staged and phased approach, uh, would look like,
uh, within a funding envelope, which, you know, um,
looks something like what we've managed in the past.
That's excellent, because you covered
the second question I was gonna ask you.
Oh. How you smooth the curve.
So, so you will be trying to, trying to encourage it.
So if we've got a, you know, an infrastructure pipeline,
which has really peaked in different places,
you'll be saying, Hey, this is what we're seeing.
We think you need to spread that out.
So have a bit of a think about that and,
and keep communicating with you,
because obviously you'll need, if, if,
if everybody who's in the peak decide they don't wanna do
it, then it won't, won't be a peak, it'll be a trough.
Um, so you, so you,
so you will be engaging on an ongoing basis with, uh,
with all those sectors.
We track the pipe, so all 12,000 projects,
we are tracking them every three months.
Yep. Um, so we're, we're essentially building a national
time series database for New Zealand to understand
how its project's tracking across time so
that you can start using it for those coordination matters.
Excellent. Cool. Thank you. Um, Kieran, then Simon, thank
You. Uh, thanks
very much. Um, you mentioned something that was
of interest to me there.
You said it's still going to take a few more years
before you get s list.
This is in reference to business cases.
Yes. At what end is causing that delay?
Is it at the part of an agency end,
or is it at your end in terms of case?
Um, I would say there's probably a bit of both there.
Um, we, I mean we, we as Ravines talked about,
we have limited resources to get through an enormous, um,
batch of projects.
We've limited it to larger projects,
so we call it sort of nationally significant.
And when you do limit the pipeline projects
above a hundred million, it's a much smaller subset.
So it's not, um, overwhelming.
But every project, um,
ideally would come through three times.
It would come through at stage one as a problem definition,
um, stage two options, stage three investment ready.
So we'd be constantly interacting.
And I suspect once we have a good population
of projects in there, um, that yes,
we probably will be resource constrained to, to get
through them all on the other side.
Um, uh, I think
agencies themselves are constrained when it comes to, um,
to business casing and having, you know,
we've now looked at about 130 odd, um, business cases
that have come to us.
Um, you know, we're, I think learning some things about
what good looks like and what good doesn't look like, um,
and the capability to put together strong business cases is,
um, you know, has been a focus of the commission
for quite some time, to be honest.
Yeah.
Sorry, Sorry, can I just a quick one.
You touched on resourcing beer.
At your best guess, if you were resourced to the extent
that you felt would be required to deal with your side
of this delay, how, how much are we still looking at here?
I'd struggle to put a, put a number to it only
because, um, at the moment, I think, well,
at the moment, I, I, I guess I would say
that we have managed to, to get through it.
Okay. But that's partly because it's been a new process.
And so as I alluded to earlier,
the numbers we've been dealing with are quite small.
Mm-hmm. Um, we have, uh, gone
through a realignment process within our own
organization to fund this.
So we've had to stop some things in order
to just do what we're doing
And reserves as well. Currently.
There, there's a lot of hope in this work
and a lot of optimism actually from the draft and,
and the feedback that we've been giving thus far as to
where we're gonna get, not just here, but within the sector,
but if there are still delays,
even when we land theater resourcing or at, at the agency,
and that, that optimism may fade.
Sure. And so some suggestions from you doesn't need
to be now as to how we can address that.
Last year we talked about how, um, unsatisfactory it is
that things are getting budgetary approval
without this work being done.
Sure. But if we are landing where we hope to get by the,
by Christmas, but we've still got this delay,
potentially these things happening, again, it kind
of goes against the point of
It. So we actually
had a recommendation in the draft plan
to this effect to, if, if you wanted to make the IPP
and this process more effective
and more comprehensive, uh,
the recommendation in the draft plan is
to make it a compulsory process.
At the moment, it's voluntary. Mm-hmm.
So, um, you know, you can elect not
to, not to engage with it.
Um, you could, that could be changed.
Mm-hmm. Thanks, Simon. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Uh,
look, great to see you here.
Uh, Elene, Jeffry, appreciate your insights.
Um, in the calendar year in question when you, which, uh,
which, uh, your report, uh, focuses on, um,
infrastructure Commission commented on the roads
of national significance, uh, that they're unlikely
to be delivered within, uh, the funding envelope available
for the state highways.
Uh, and I think you also made the point that, uh,
four laneing grade separation for all of them, uh,
risk being, uh, scope that was unnecessarily expensive
to deliver the benefits.
So I'm wondering if you've got any suggestions
for this committee, parliament, and,
and for those who are concerned about wanting
to get the benefits from these state highway improvements,
they're concerned about the cost, what kind
of questions we should be asking a delivery agency like,
like NCTA, for example, about
how they reconcile these two things.
Um, yeah.
Um, we, we've got a few questions I suppose we would ask.
I mean, just a, an observation.
I mean, the, the scale of the transportation investment
that we see, um, obviously ex exceeds our capacity to fund.
Hmm. Um, the, the funding
of the Rons program would require a 70% rise in Fed.
Um, so you look at sort of willingness to pay here
and, you know, you quickly realize you've
got a, got a funding challenge.
Um, I guess the question that I would ask, and,
and this is not specific to transport,
but it's actually a more general point about, um, investment
and capacity, uh,
and how to keep it reasonably close to where the demand is.
So the challenge with infrastructure is
that when you do an upgrade, you're often bringing on, uh,
an enormous amount of new capacity all at once.
And so it can mean that you sort of slip behind demand
and that kind of looks like congestion
or you go way ahead of it.
Um, and all of a sudden you're maintaining an asset
that actually you don't have the user base to pay for.
And so, uh, with any kind of infrastructure investment,
I think the question that you could be asking if you're
facing co a large costs that you can't fund,
which I think this is the case,
is are there capital investments you can make
that don't bring on such a large amount of capacity?
Um, so to give you a bit of an example, a two lane road can,
can, um, tolerate somewhere between 25
and 32,000 trips a day.
Uh, a four lane, uh, road can tolerate somewhere between 40
and 51,000 trips.
There's an option between there, which is a two plus one.
You can imagine a world where you sort
of phase these things slowly so
that you are aligning your capacity with your,
uh, with your demand.
And in so doing, actually bringing it,
bringing the costs down probably within, uh, the envelope
that you know, more closely to, to a, an envelope
that is fundable and,
and thereby improve the certainty of the project.
Because if you're operating in a world where, uh,
the costs are so high, such that, um,
a decision maker really struggles to write
that number down on a budget line,
that's not certainty to the sector.
That's just frustration.
Um, and that's what we've had a lot
of in recent times, I suppose.
Okay. Thanks. That's really helpful.
Um, Julianne, you had a sup on that.
Yeah, it was just a sup on
what you were just referring to.
And just wondering if you are providing any advice
to the government about the importance of, um,
considering the impact of things like time of use charging,
um, before rushing to ahead with a, a program
of capital works, especially in urban areas.
So what another, just to kind of lead off
what I was talking about before, aligning your asset,
build your capacity, build with demand, uh,
another thing you can do there is think about demand
management tools, um, so
that you're not getting too far ahead or behind.
So the commission has, you know,
spoken at length about the need to, um,
get demand management into, into transportation networks.
It's just very noticeable that we don't have it.
And as a result, we are building for peak
and building for peak is very, very expensive.
And so it's sort of unsurprising to me
that we're looking at projects that are really high cost,
uh, in a sector that we're not doing much demand management.
Like those things sort of just go together, um, quite well.
Um, demand, uh, congestion charging is one of those.
And at the last select committee we talked about, um,
our work looking at the New York Congestion charge scheme.
Um, and the other one I would sort of say is, uh,
improving the ability to, um, house people
around existing networks.
When you think about housing supply, the biggest driver
of infrastructure cost to housing supply,
uh, is transportation.
Uh, the other things, um, are very small in comparison.
And so if you can put people
around existing transportation networks through up zoning,
uh, you know, you stand
to reduce the per capita infrastructure cost.
Do you, you might not have the answer to this,
but have, have you done any work on, like identifying
what if the, if the major issue is defined
by a government agency as a peak hour problem, like how,
how, like for what time of the day would you
expect the, you know, congestion charging
or time of use pricing to apply?
Like, I, I guess what I'm getting at is, you know,
if you have an agency saying there's a really big bottleneck
problem at peak time, um, how could we look at
proposals and investment case
and ask useful questions about how, what percentage
of the time that actually is a problem?
Sure. Like, if it's not a problem Yeah.
More than two hours a day, is it something
that needs more capacity or, yeah, management,
I, I would be wanting to ask the question firstly of,
show me, um, show me the vehicle movements by time of day,
and then I would un wanna understand what the propensity
for those vehicle movements is
to change as a function of price.
So there are some, uh, infrastructure sectors
that have very inelastic, um, responsiveness that, you know,
you can ranch with the price up a lot
and they won't move, um,
because they need electricity or they need water.
Um, and then there's some sectors
that are quite responsive to price.
Um, and you want to know what that number looks like
and feels like to understand what the,
what the movement might be.
If you look at sort of, so my, um, prior would be that, um,
you know, in the, in the, the peaks
and increasingly into peaks in a place like Auckland,
you're gonna see a big surge in use.
Um, and that a congestion charge is gonna
help, um, do a few things.
Either push some of those trips into areas
where you've got spare capacity.
Um, it might push some trips onto public transport or, um,
and this is, uh, certainly the case in other places,
it might suppress trips altogether.
Um, and you actually don't need to,
to suppress too many trips
to generate quite a substantial increase in capacity
and push out the need for
what are becoming very expensive capital, uh,
upgrades as a result of that.
And that's gonna help you Tetris in a whole bunch
of other infrastructure projects
that you're gonna be wanting to do at the same time in the
water space or the electricity space and so on and so forth.
And would you expect that level
of detail would be available to the public
of the vehicle movements by time of day?
That, and that, you know, this committee would be able
to get that information from product sponsors?
I don't see why not. Yeah. Yeah.
U usually it's the factor
between your average and your peak.
So the closer the, the average
and the peaker, the better the utilization of the s
But if your average is low
and the peak is very high, that just suggests
that your peaks are happening only at certain times.
But if your average is close to your peak,
you are then running out of capacity.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. You can't shift it anywhere else. Sense.
Yeah. Makes sense.
Okay. Um, did anybody else on that particular topic? Yeah.
Okay. So yeah, think Ms Chair. Thank you.
Um, just on the, the Rons, obviously there are a set number
of those, so that's quite a envelope.
Um, my stuff is around the extent of specific advice
that's been given for each of those ROMs.
Um, Jeff, you've talked about the two plus one option.
If that was to be rolled out across some of those ROMs, uh,
then that would fall within the band
or the financial envelope that the government had previously
perhaps identified.
What is the nature of the specific advice
that has been given for each of those projects, uh,
by the commission to the government?
Um, we have not given, um, individual advice on those.
Um, we've spoken to, uh, wahi about, um,
them using the IPP process, uh, that hasn't been used
for the, for the Rons.
Um, but as I say, uh, we will be giving, um,
within the, the national infrastructure plan, um,
we won't be, we won't be running the, the,
the full IPP rule ruler over each of these projects,
because as I say, it's a voluntary process.
And, um, and, uh, that's not a process that they've wanted
to use at the moment,
although these projects, um, you know,
will in planning for long periods of time.
So there's plenty of opportunity.
Uh, so, um, but,
but what we will do is look at, in the plan,
we will be looking at a sort of what I would characterize
as a triggers type analysis, where we'll be saying,
looking at vehicle movements, looking at unit costs
of the projects, uh, and looking at actual, uh, demand
and willingness to pay and say, timing wise,
when would it make sense to do these projects?
And hopefully show how
that would fit into a consolidated fundable, um,
capital investment pro, uh, program for, for New Zealand.
Just following up, uh, from that, in terms
of from the commission's perspective,
obviously looking at the national infrastructure plan
where transportation is a huge vital part of that,
is the commission concerned that there seems to be a lack
of willingness, uh, to engage at this early stage, given
that the government has signaled that they intend
to deliver these projects within a fairly quick timeframe?
That's questionable as we know,
but is there an element of, of concern from the commission
around a lack of engagement over, um,
what are essentially significant chunks
of resource going into transportation projects?
I think that the IPP process is a new one for, um,
not just government agencies,
but local government, private sector,
and folks are thinking about how to use it, when
to use it, um, what projects to use it for, um,
and that there's a sort
of natural learning process going on.
Um, other countries have been doing this for quite some time
and, um, you know, have, have sort
of normalized it over time.
Um, we've been doing it for about a year, so, um,
so there's, there's sort of a ways to go.
Um, so I, I think it's, to be honest,
I think it's probably too early for me
to be concerned one way or the other.
Yeah.
Can I just follow up that issue on that same issue?
No, just, just, just on the, um, Ron's program.
So if, so you get a, you get an overview of this is
what the, the, um, the project,
the programs look like across each infrastructure.
That's a, that's a moderately large one.
Um, if you are looking at that
and saying, well, actually, A, we don't believe you've got
the ability to deliver in time.
In fact, they know that they've said that to us.
Um, minister knows that.
So we know it's gonna get spread over time, regardless.
Mm-hmm. Um, so would you look at that in terms
of the infrastructure plan
and say, well, we don't actually
believe it's gonna look like this.
We could believe it's gonna look more like that.
That's gonna be, it's gonna take
longer, it's gonna be smoother.
So it's the first, first part of the question.
Um, and the second one is just in terms of the advice.
So you would expect some to backwards
and forwards about the quality of the infrastructure.
You talked about two plus one type, you know, things like
that, which is what's the question?
Started this off Simon's question. Same way actually.
Do we want to build, um, that quality
of motorway the whole way?
Um, because mean, for example, we saw what happened with the
otta to live project where NZTA said, well,
actually we would like to dial that back a little bit,
and the community went ballistic.
Yeah, because, because it, it had been,
it'd be promised for lane the whole way.
Yeah. If it had been promised a different,
if a different proposition you promised it,
probably wouldn't have had the same pushback.
So just interested in your comments and those two issues.
Yeah. Okay. So, um, well
firstly on the sort of fund, the first question,
which I think, um, is really tied up in Fundability,
you know, market capacity as well.
Like even if you wanted to deliver these all at once, um,
you know, we've been through that.
We've tried to deliver like large programs all at once,
and we saw the inflationary nature of that.
So, um, uh, that's, that's an issue.
But putting, putting that to one side, um, you know,
with a lot of these projects, you know, what,
what we've said is that, um, if, if you want
to fund the project through a toll, you need to see, um,
a certain amount of, of usage, a certain amount of benefit,
and a certain, uh, level of cost.
Uh, I think I gave the specifics of those figures at the,
the last last session we had.
And that'll tell you whether or not the toll
itself will fund the road.
Um, we're in a world where we don't get close
to a hundred percent, so we
Know that You, you know that.
Yep. So there's a, there's a, there's a fundability, um,
thinking, another forward guidance that we provide
essentially says, um, is based on the settings
that we currently see.
So our view of what is likely to happen
is embedded in our forward guidance.
So, so you, as you haven't taken the optimistic, if,
if NC TA came in here
and said, we're gonna build all of these within 10 years,
you've gone, we don't believe
that you've, you've put a different
Yeah. We would say that this,
this would exceed our forward
guidance and you are going to run into some Okay.
Problems. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
So that, that's on the, the sort of fundability side of it.
On the expectation side,
I think this is a really important issue, um,
because, you know, I think, uh, expectations are,
um, are easily set with communities.
Um, and when we talk about projects that are really large
and run into these funding problems,
you can't avoid the fact that the, the community sort of,
sort of doesn't see those funding
problems for what they are.
They expect the service, which we've been talking about.
And so the funding issue manifests to the community
as delay in frustration.
Um, why are we not seeing this now?
And, uh, I guess my reaction to that would be
that we could probably do a better job at setting
expectations of what a capital,
what capital program is deliverable for New Zealand, uh,
and, and making that a little bit more known out there,
rather than kind of, um, letting,
letting folks down on the downside.
Uh, afterwards, the IPP is designed to do that
because it is a readiness assessment.
Um, so if you're endorsed at say, stage one
and, and let's say you make a decision to fund it,
so you're gonna fund it as if it's a stage three,
the commission's advice would be expect
delays and rising costs.
'cause you don't know enough about the project, um,
to have any confidence
that it's like deliverable on the time, time and cost.
Um, that's, that's currently known.
And actually we, you know, we saw that, um, uh, with the,
um, the, uh, revised cost, um, estimates
for the Rons projects.
Um, now when, when I came to this committee, uh,
several months ago talking about, uh,
the Northern Rons project, we had a, a cost figure for that,
which seemed high to me,
but we ran the numbers on it anyway.
And that has since gone north, right?
Um, actually reasonably consistently
with the reference based case from the uk, which we
provided this committee back then as well.
So, um, yeah.
At at risk of managing expectations, wouldn't
that be an obvious one where the issue is probably more
about reliability than it is about, um,
congestion on the route, and
therefore the two plus one approach may well be the
appropriate model to choose six and nods. Yeah.
So this is as good as any
design workshop I've ever been involved. Simon,
Simon, well, Simon, and then ki
Thank You. Oh, so no, we're
still on sub on this one. Yeah.
Um, so you mentioned that, um, one
of the ways, one of the drivers
of housing cost is transport cost.
And, you know, we,
we have an urban development agency of a kind.
Um, we have a roading agency.
We don't seem to have an agency
or an entity that says we're doing a transport development
and therefore around a, around a node, for example,
we are doing residential
and commercial, um,
that's incredibly common elsewhere in the world.
They, even, you do things like maximize land value
and, you know, create, we called public private partnerships
as a result, is there a gap in the infrastructure, uh,
delivery or enabling space in New Zealand?
So the, the, the market mechanism
for coordinating housing development and,
and infrastructure is land prices, right?
When you put in a new, uh, rail station
with improved connectivity, you can expect
to see the land values within the catchment area of
that station go up, which is exactly, by the way,
what happened when the city rail link was, was announced.
The land price is, is the, um, coordination price
to the developer to start building
that way rather than that way.
Because when land prices are high,
you don't want to use much land.
Um, that's why buildings are high in the
city and low in the suburbs.
Mm. Um, the problem of course, um, uh,
occurs when you have rules that prevent, uh,
housing from occurring when land prices go up,
which is why, you know, you can get low density development
with very high land prices.
Um, and that is, uh, the result of a co well, let's say,
a sort of coordination failure.
But, you know, clearly there
are interests on either side of that.
So is there a, is there a missing institution? I don't know.
I think if you got landmarks working more effectively,
actually some of this stuff could take care of itself
if you wanted to sort of work in a world where you keep, um,
it difficult to build,
but you wanna sort of softly manage around that
through urban development agencies.
Uh, sure that's been tried before.
Um, but I would, I would sort of, I suppose, argue
that it's, it's better to, um, to, uh, you know,
to maybe take more of a supply led approach
and just let development go with the infrastructure. I,
I'm heartened that is totally based in sound.
Thank you, Jack.
You right. Thank you.
Uh, I'm pretty keen to clarify something here.
So you just mentioned that the IPP poster is supposed
to address the concerns that we've seen
around projects being announced and,
and commenced without full understanding of cost
and funding, et cetera.
But you also say that the wrongs haven't been included.
Now you've identified that that's because it's voluntary
and we accept that, and I'm not having to go at you,
but surely there is a massive gap here when these
as a bundle are some of the biggest infrastructure projects,
not only on the books, but that we've seen in a wee while,
and they're not getting assessed through the process
that you've actually been asked
to commence by this government.
So if you are to some degree bound
by an agency's willingness to include themselves,
what can you do to provide information to allow
Parliament and the public to assist what the decisions
that the government are making around these projects?
Um, well, we don't have a huge amount of tools. Um, yeah.
Well, this is, but I suppose what we can do is, um, is,
uh, make it known.
I mean, it, you know, they're not there.
That's, we, we,
we make our commentary based on whatever numbers we see in
the media mm-hmm.
But we don't get the submission,
so we don't get the details.
That's extraordinary. Yeah.
So we, we we're in a situation
where there have been some credible questions raised
around the affordability of these projects
that have been announced and committed to
the minister himself, has made commentary around, uh,
casting, uh, I, I think, uh, uh,
an exercise in managing expectations
around when these things that they have committed
to will actually be done,
and you as an organization
can't include them in your process.
Well, that is why we have gone down the path
of this triggers approach that I,
that I talked to you about.
So this is, you can think of this as not quite an IPP,
but a sort of directional,
what we might expect within a funding envelope.
So, um, to Ravi's point, um, we can't go through the detail
of them, but we can speak at a, a higher level,
and that's what I was sort of signaling in the, in the
Outset. And so
we, and I respect that we need to wait
for this to be submitted to.
Sure. So I get that. But, uh, through that process
that you've done, we can look at that
and look at the information that we do know around the roads
of national significance, and make a clear correlation as to
what you believe will be achievable generally,
and then apply that to the wrongs
That, I mean, that is in many ways, the point
of the forward guidance is to help people understand
what is a sort of likely path.
Wouldn't it be easy to understand if
the NGTA just included them in this so
that you could actually assist it?
I mean, look, I, I think in, in time, uh, at earlier
comments, again, like, this is a new process,
and I think they're kind of asking the question of, well,
don't we have our own prioritization process?
All right, we've got our own monetized costs
and benefits manual and so on and so forth.
Um, so this is another example of an agency thinking, well,
what is the value we get by going
through an independent agency?
And, um, uh,
and it's not, this is not a comment specific to NZTA, it's,
it's interesting to watch different project
teams grapple with that question.
Like, when does, when is independence
important for a project team?
I get that you don't want to be put in a position
where you could be interpreted
as having a crack at them to get there.
But I'll go back to your recommendation in your draft.
Is this why you said you would be,
we'd all benefit if this was a compulsory
Process? Not, not
specific to transport. No.
Let's leave them out of it and speak generally.
Uh, sure. Things
Like this is why. Sure.
Okay. Thank you.
Just on that forward guidance, um, can you tell us now,
and I understand if you can't, if there will be, um, any
comments on like, you know, whether
or not other alternatives should have been assessed,
or is this uniquely, what can we pay for?
When is there anything about prioritizing
specific projects because they're at a more sure state?
Um, yeah, so that
doesn't come through in the forward guidance.
The forward guidance is like levels of expenditure Okay.
By sector across time.
And it will be presented as proportions of GDP. Oh, I see.
Yeah. So transport, I think is 1% of GDP or so.
So that was in the draft and we're, we're updating that.
But in terms of your second point on, um, do,
should you expect to see, um, advice on the sort
of phased nature of projects?
Um, yes. Yes.
And that's what I, I referred to as,
as triggers. But, um, yeah.
And also, I guess I just have one other question
because the minister, you know, did say
that NITA had their own process when I asked, um, at the,
um, estimates, um, committee of the whole house hearings,
you know, why the roads
of initial significance weren't being put through the IPP.
Um, given that now there's a substantive amount
of crown funding going into transport projects,
is that a case, I guess, for it to go
through the IIPP to be weighed up?
You know, whereas when, maybe when NZTA was fully funding
its program from the, uh, national
and Transport Fund, um, it was fair
to say they had their own process. Do you think that given
That Crown funding, I I think that's should be subject
to the same evaluation as anyone else?
I think that's an argument.
Um, there are other, um, projects that have been sent to us
that, for instance, aren't necessarily
seeking government funding.
Hmm. So you might want to engage with the process
for reasons other than just wanting government funding.
And I'll give you an example. We've had projects from local
government where they want an independent voice to say, yes,
we believe this is a good project.
'cause it helps with their own decision making even though
there's no funding on the line.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I, yeah, I, I think that you, you could make
that argument, but the whole IPP process is actually that,
um, that sort of independent assurance has value.
I irrespective of who's sort
of funding the project in many ways.
I, I think it's important to put this in a total package.
We talked about the importance of this process, and it's new
and we think it's quite effective.
And will, um, over time be very useful
for New Zealand from an infrastructure point of view.
So we know it's useful, then we know that it takes time
and effort to put projects out and it takes time
and effort on our part to review it.
Mm-hmm. Um, if we are making all these investments,
then standing back, it has to be of some use.
So if the effort is going into this process for projects
that are not as important,
but not for things that are very important,
then the credibility over time is going to be lost.
Mm-hmm. So we, we do want the process
to be credible, to be understood
and to be used widely,
but we are working within our current
confines at the moment. Dan.
Great. Levi and Jeff, thanks for coming before us today.
Um, just going back to the national infrastructure plan,
you've presented that to the government, um,
after a consultation process.
I'm just wondering if you can, you haven't? Not yet.
So yeah, so we presented it to the minister,
to the minister, um, and then we've had a consultation
process and we've had ministerial feedback.
We then present it to the minister, um, uh, sort
of 22nd of December, I think is the, okay.
The date there or thereabouts.
And, um, he will then present it to the house
as soon as practicable after
That. Okay. Fantastic.
Are you able to elucidate for us some
of the key themes that came out of the feedback?
Um, the consultation on the plan?
Yeah, I think the, um, well on, on the, so,
so we are running those two kind of consultation process.
One with the minister and one with the,
the general population.
We did, um, uh, uh, ask
or look for, um, support or,
or disapproval of the recommendations in the plan.
Yeah. And by and large, they all had majority support.
So I thought that they had, as a set of recommendations,
seemed to hang together reasonably, reasonably well.
We, we had a lot of feedback saying, um, uh,
please include our sector in the plan.
And so there's always this question when it comes
to infrastructure of what is
infrastructure and what is not infrastructure.
Mm-hmm. Um, what you will receive early next year is a very
comprehensive view of what infrastructure is.
We're covering, um,
more than a dozen sectors in there trying to understand, um,
things like their capital stocks
and as a result their maintenance schedules, um,
and renewal schedules and so on.
And so I thought it was, um, good that
we had sectors that weren't included in there saying,
actually, please can you have our
sector represented in that?
Um, and so we've, we have, um, expanded it from seven to
a lot more than that currently.
Um, so, uh, that's a couple of, um, tidbits from,
and I suppose on the, on the ministerial stuff, um, uh,
where we've tried to go is with our forward guidance, uh,
try and really highlight what are the difficult decisions
that are gonna have to be made if you execute
on our forward guidance.
And, um, uh,
I think there are some really difficult ones in there.
We've actually spoken to many of them
around this table before.
Uh, one of them that I would kind
of point out would be something like affordability
of water capital spend, um, which, you know,
we've seen the water services plans, um,
and uh, they are at levels that are, um, very, very high.
Um, we would sort of, when you look at previous levels
of expenditure and our forward guidance, you realize that,
wow, you know, we're gonna have to try
and improve the utilization of our assets to get close
to the numbers we're talking about, even though, um,
even though they are in line with
what we've done sort of in the past.
So we're trying to highlight 10 key shifts
to focus the minds on what are the difficult things
that need to be, need to be done.
Hopefully none of them come as a surprise to you.
We've talked about water,
we've talked about things like needing
to ramp up hospital spend.
Um, so, you know, uh, you'll, you'll, you'll see
what those are in course,
Correct? Yeah. And,
um, in terms of operationalizing it
after it's submitted to the government
and then to parliament, what does that look like?
Um, I know you said you'll be updating the plan Yeah.
And the pipeline continuously,
but how do we make sure that this is embedded in the,
the way we do things in New Zealand going forward?
Yeah, so two parts to that.
The, um, our legislation requires a government response six
months after it's presented to the house.
So it'll probably take you to midyear.
Um, so that's sort of part, part one
of the formal government response to the, to the plan.
Um, but the point you make is that,
and I've said this to this committee
before, that for us,
the plan is really an operational document.
Mm-hmm. Um, we will continue to, to iterate
and update the forward guidance.
Um, the pipeline's not going anywhere.
Continue to do that every, um, every quarter.
Um, and would actually like to improve the, the coverage
of it and how we use the pipeline as well.
It has, um, the ability to, I think,
to be a much better coordination tool.
And then the IPP, so this is you, what you're seeing
through the NIP is the commission's
ongoing sort of work program.
Mm. And any risks that you, that
that commission sees from, um,
ensuring the, the, um, the plan, you know, moves forward.
And
I think that, um, you know, we talk a lot about, uh,
consensus around projects.
Um, I think it would be more useful to get into a space
of consensus around process.
Mm-hmm. Um,
what do we collectively think good process looks like, uh,
and what are the questions that are being asked repeatedly
of all projects?
And if we can get to a point where we agree on good process
for capital investment, actually I think
that would be a giant, giant leap forward.
Mm. Yeah. No, good. Thank you.
Thank, thank you.
Can I just double back to the water services delivery plans?
Um, obviously there were a number of those, um,
and the decision was taken to either accept
or or reject those.
Can you just clarify the, the level of involvement
that the commission had in terms of looking at those?
Yeah, I can, I might turn, Graham might
Come Up to talk about maybe,
but we're essentially what what we do
with all capital investment plans, and this is true of water
or, or health
or education, is we are wanting to understand
how those match up with our Ford guidance, right?
'cause our Ford guidance is sort of saying, well,
here's our view of what the stock of assets currently is.
Here's our view of what the depreciation
rate on those stocks are.
So we have a view on the renewal cycle
and we have a view on, um, uh, what sort of levels
of affordability are.
And then we can kind of say, well, their plans are way
above ours or way below.
And try and understand why there is a
difference or what the difference is.
Um, I don't know if you want to comment further on that.
No. Um, Graham Campbell, director of economics
of the commission, that's exactly what we do.
And then also, um, the team works
with the pipeline is bringing in some of that,
that information from the Department of Internal Affairs.
And so once we have all that information, then we'll be sort
of turning it over to see how it compares
with our forward guidance on investment and water
and wastewater to see, you know, how much above, above
or below it might be compared to
where we would expect investment
to be over the next 20, 30 years.
So in, in terms of, uh,
having your team look at those plans as a bunch,
do you identify any particular concerns
around the affordability issue, um, delivery
of services in an appropriate way in terms
of longevity of infrastructure?
Obviously the government had a, an open opportunity
to have more entities than they have ended up with,
but what concerns, if any, uh, had you identified?
Um, I think our, at this stage, our level of engagement
with those specific plans is still in the early stages.
What we have done a more, um, we've done more work on the,
the 2024 long-term plans, which are similar to the,
to the water service delivery plans.
And what we identified
after that analysis is that compared
to our forward guidance, the level
of renewal spending in the long-term plans was very similar
to what we were projecting
for renewal requirements for water.
Where we saw the biggest difference
between the two was the level of investment
to improve the level of service.
So you can, you can think of this as, um,
higher environmental standards
or um, resilience of water networks
and then also to accommodate investment
for growth in population.
So expanding capacity on the network, the amount
that was in the 2024 long-term plans, um, was,
was quite a bit larger than
what we would expect within our modeling based upon sort
of historical trends of
how we have built out our water network.
So we've been working, trying to engage
with key players in the sector, so DIA tomato, ROI,
local government to understand, you know,
what exactly is driving
that potential difference between the two.
And I think that's going to be that Jeff alluded to, um,
an operational part of our forward guidance is trying
to understand where, when there are differences
between the two things, um,
what could explain those, those two things.
Okay.
Um, I'll jump in with one moment, which is just to deal
with an issue which we were talking about this morning. Um,
Was, sorry, Mr. Chair, do
you mind if I ask us up on that?
Yeah, no, go for it. Or let's come back to that up. Uh,
Yeah, no, no, go for it. Go
For life. Okay. Thank you.
I appreciate that.
Uh, thanks for that response. Can I just clarify something?
You, you talked about looking at the
projected spend in the long, long-term plans.
Um, but obviously there's a 30 year, um, focus around the,
the broader, uh, in your board.
Uh, well not report, just to be absolutely clear,
that statement of performance expectations,
it does say you've got a 30 year focus,
but then in addition to that, you're looking at
what is likely to be done in the first 10 years.
But in the context of water reform,
this is particularly important
because the councils themselves originally
provided projected spend over 30 years.
And there is a credible argument
that the local water done well
approach does not add up when the full
expected expenditure over 30 years is applied.
Which is why we,
it focuses primarily on the long-term plans.
Now there's been reports in the media the last couple
of days that that's projected
with 48 billion over those years.
But we also know from council's own numbers that years 11
to 30 is actually much more project.
So can you explain why you focused on the long-term plans
and not use council's over a city projection please?
So for the information that was available to compare
to our forward guidance at the time, it was the only thing
that was available to us at that point was the, the 10 years
for the 2024 to sort 34 LTVs.
Um, as I said, we, we are beginning to get the data on
for the water service delivery plans.
I think the point that you're making,
however, is, is a, is a good one in that
that's the reason why the forward guidance does take the 30
year projection view
because, um, while we do like to compare, you know,
how various infrastructure providers, capital plans are
aligning with the forward guidance, what we've sort
of said is that the forward guidance is meant, meant to be
more directive in the long term about the level
of infrastructure rather than sort of prescriptive.
So if we see a deviation in those things
and say the first five, 10 years it is, is something for us
to monitor, but we're really more concerned about the
overall direction of the 30 year period
because, um, as we all know,
infrastructure lasts a really long time,
it has a long renewal requirements.
So if we see sort of deviations in the, in the shorter term,
then um, we like to monitor.
But, um, to answer your question that the information
for 30 year investment plans for water, um, we didn't have
that when we were doing the investment requirements.
We do have information from some of the earlier, um,
investment, um, sort of several years ago.
But that, that was, um, the information
for that is a little bit out of date.
We wanted to be as, as current as possible.
Specifically what information you're referring to there.
This, some of the modeling that was done
for the previous reforms in water from, um,
the water commission from Scotland. You
Consider that out of date now that, okay, so
that's from the Scottish model?
Yes. Okay, cool. So what I was referring to
specifically was the figures that councils gave
the Department of Internal Affairs from their own
projections over the 30 years.
And it was those figures which led to, uh, the projection
that there would be up to 185 billion
required spend over 30 years.
It's really interesting that you say that
that information wasn't available
to you when you've been working
with the Department of Internal Affairs.
Given your timelines aligned with that projections,
if the Department of Internal Affairs made
that information available, would you likely utilize
that in your assessments?
I think it would be useful for us to see, yes. Alright.
Something we to thanks And thanks. Thanks
The chair. No,
That's okay. Um, look,
the issue I was just about to start with, um,
I think the last time you were in front of us, um, we,
we were exploring the issue of growth, paying for growth
and there's some words there which we were actually trying
to wrestle with as to what it actually meant.
Um, and uh, you said something along the lines, uh,
and the high and high level findings are
that new population generally contributes somewhere
between 30 and 50% of all growth, I presume cost of growth.
Just want to just find out growth,
growth related infrastructure.
Just to be quite clear about this, the proportion of
that which is paid for by essentially the growth,
whether it's a developer, whether it's a new population,
whether whatever it is, as opposed
to the existing population got broad, broad position. Yeah.
Yeah. I mean, um, I might actually get this one over.
So we, we published a paper on this looking at,
I looked at something, the link
and it was like I couldn't quite
Yeah. But
it was trying to do exactly
what you are, what you're talking about.
I was trying to say for an additional new resident
that comes into, um, a town
or a city, uh, what proportion of the cost of
that new resident is covered through say the,
the additional revenue that
that resident brings to the, to the city.
So, you know, rating revenue and so on.
Um, and we did that for I think about six
or seven different places around New Zealand.
And there, there were a couple that were, were higher,
but the, the main growth ones were in that area of 30 to
to 50%.
Um, I guess a a, a comment on that would be,
um, that that it, you know,
'cause clearly the people are still coming,
so somebody's covering the cost
and what that essentially means.
That's the question is that we're,
we're probably using more consolidated revenue
to fund growth, um, rather than, you know,
new individuals paying for, for that growth.
And I think the lower that number is the,
probably the higher proportion of consolidated revenues.
So by and large you've encouraged to go
to more user pays approach generally?
Uh, yeah.
Well, well yeah, we, I mean we do say, um, that, um,
having an understanding of
what the user charge is an important starting point.
So a higher, a higher proportion of growth being paid for
by growth would be, would fit with that, wouldn't it?
It would, yeah. Okay.
Graham, I, I don't know if you want to comment. Yeah,
Just a couple follow ups on that.
So what we tried to do in that, in that research was try
to understand for councils that are putting,
they're installing or building growth infrastructure,
they're, they're fronting up front costs,
but then they have long run maintenance costs.
There's also costs that are, you know,
when a developer builds a new small road
or they put in small water pipes,
they vest those assets to council.
Yep. And those have long run maintenance requirements.
There's also long run operational requirements.
And so what we tried to understand was based upon the costs
of providing infrastructure for growing populations,
how much might these councils expecting growth in rating
base, how much they'll receive in development contributions,
and then in any additional user charges.
And what we found for the fast growing councils
that Jeff said that that rate
of recovery over a 25 year period from 20 2007
to 2031 was about 30 to 50% in the fast growing councils.
While user charging is, is quite important here.
I think one of the things that the research highlighted
for us was while having, you know, cost
of cost reflective development contributions
or levies is important, um, there are a whole bunch
of other costs that are, that go beyond the capital cost
of installing growth infrastructure.
So the long run maintenance cost of infrastructure
for vested assets, which are not related,
which there's no DCS paid for those,
but they have to be maintained
by councils over a long period of time,
those manifest as additional costs.
So what we suggest in the paper is in addition
to making things like user charges more cost reflective,
it's also important for, for councils to be, um, cognizant
of the amount of growth that they're receiving, um,
in comparison to the infrastructure.
So it's better to have say,
10 houses using a single water pipe if you can make it
happen versus say three.
'cause then you get more growth
and rating base to cover that.
So that's the other way that councils can,
can improve the sort of financial math on,
on growth infrastructure is to now enable more
development in the places
where you have existing infrastructure.
Well first of all, thank you for that answer.
Um, the second one, 'cause nz TA is the other one
that I keep on talking about about that doesn't charge dcs
yet, but you know, we're working on that one.
Um, so, but go to that,
the conversation we're having earlier about urban
development, um, and the densification.
But are you engaged in any way with the RMA reforms?
Because obviously there's the go up
and go out mantra, which is going on at the moment.
'cause that makes it cheaper, at least at the front end
to deliver more housing,
but doesn't necessarily make it cheaper whole
of life to deliver that
More housing. Yeah, so
I mean, I I was actually gonna make this point.
I think it triangulates quite, quite nicely with
what Graham was just saying, that, you know, the, the sort
of idea of, um,
and you know, the, the upzoning kind of push over the last,
what would we say, uh, since the unitary plan, I suppose 10,
10 years, but which has moved from local government to more
of a central government, um, focus has, I think, been met
with, um, some concern by councils
because they don't necessarily have these pricing
regimes in place right now.
So from their point of view,
they're seeing areas get up zoned.
They're looking at it going, well, gosh,
like the infrastructure out here is very expensive.
How are we gonna fund all of this?
And of course, um, that's a legitimate concern,
but it kind of speaks to why you need
to have those good pricing signals in place.
If you don't, if you're not using dcs or you,
or they're covering a very small proportion
of the overall cost, um, that's gonna look very frightening
to your existing rating base.
Hmm. Um, but if you do have a more sophisticated
understanding of what the price should be to service
that growth, you know, you, you start moving into a world
where you say, sure, you can build out here if you want to,
but just be aware, um, the price is gonna be very high
and that might, um, dissuade
developers from, from going there.
And look, can I ask one other one, which is,
I know there in cer there are certain places where,
particularly where you've got managed retreat being
required, um, of a community where the ability to take
that community effectively
and put it somewhere else where it's safer, um, to pay,
to be able to pay for that, you've effectively got
to make sure that you don't lose the premium
of the land, which you're gonna put it on.
So if you're gonna take a town, stick it on top
of an area which is rurally, currently rurally zoned.
If someone else gets the premium for that rural zoning,
then there's a very, very large cost to somebody,
either the residents who be, who have having to move
because the you, the flood prone or whatever it might be,
or the authorities who are doing the moving
or the insurers are paying
and somebody else's capturing the benefit.
Um, any observations about how we make sure that we manage
that in a way which doesn't end up
with somebody paying all the costs
and somebody else getting them benefits?
Yes. Um, some Specific examples I'm
Thinking of. Yeah, I mean, that,
that's an interesting example.
'cause that's a case where you are kind of
hypothetically relocating an entire sort of area of,
area of development.
I mean, this issue has sort of, um, come up in urban spaces
before where councils are often thinking about, you know,
if we're gonna put in an amenity,
how do we capture the value of
that amenity at the same, at the same time?
The, the a comment that I would make on that is that, um,
if if you've got, uh, regulatory rules,
which make it very difficult to build in an area,
then the idea of upzoning will be met
with some large increase in land value.
If you don't have those things in place, um, it won't, it,
it, it will manifest in the form of just higher development.
Right. In other words, we'll get that big pricing signal,
the developer will want to go up
and we'll get more, more houses.
Um, the ca the case of, um, so it's not immediately clear
to me that we want
to run a highly pressured urbanized land market so
that council can capture the value
because it leads to a ton of un unintended consequences.
And, and local government has struggled
to do this for many, many years.
I I'm actually thinking of circumstances simply
where you have communities which are, um, at risk
From, from like flooding, Inundation,
sea level rise, whatever it might be.
Yeah. Um, and they effectively need to be moved.
In other words, you, so you, you,
some places gonna be worth more,
that place is gonna be over time.
Yeah. So the way that, that, uh, where we have had
to grapple with this specifically from an infrastructure
point of view is in two ways.
The first is, um, infrastructure
that is at risk from these locations.
And what is the asset owner thinking about doing in terms
of protecting its own infrastructure
and what are the incentives to protect it?
Um, this is important, um, for asset owners
that have insurance and are seeing these numbers going up
and have an incentive to think about changing behavior.
And those asset owners
that don't have insurance for their assets
Or can't get it Or, or can't get it, um,
or rely on the crown, um, for, uh, rebuilding post or,
And the crown's quite clear, signaling is not there. Yes.
Yep. So, um, so that's one, um, kind
of interaction with infrastructure.
And we've been trying to value what, um, proportion
of our infrastructure is at risk and,
and how that risk is changing over time.
And actually you'll see some of that come
through in the forward guidance
because resilience is a, is part of the forward guidance.
Um, and then the second part interaction here is
infrastructure that can avoid these situations from
happening in the first place by, for instance,
improving flood protection infrastructure.
So you can think about this as, um, you know,
if you imagine a project whereby if you build a piece
of flood protection infrastructure, it reduces your risk
and reduces the insurance premium for the town.
Um, and it reduces it by so much that the town is prepared
to fund the flood protection infrastructure.
What we're really saying is we are looking at these risks go
up and we're saying we need
to have a much more sophisticated understanding
of when it makes sense to build infrastructure
to protect these places.
So back to my old thing before, what are the costs?
Um, how many houses is it protecting?
Um, and what's the marginal benefit from the alternative,
which might be to relocate?
Um, and putting some numbers around those that stack up.
Right.
That's useful. I don't see any other questions,
but I will ask my, my last one, NCTA,
again, asset management.
Um, so the, the, the conflict
and all of that, um, inability to be able to fund the roads
of national significance in a, in a particular timeframe.
The likelihood underst the well understood why they
understood likelihood it's gonna be longer.
It's, it's the ability to manage the assets
and you've been very strong,
so you should really say it's not just NCT issue,
it's an across the board issue.
It's the ability for, for organizations
to actually manage the assets and look
after what they've already got
before they start building the new stuff.
Um, got any comment on just
how those things play with each other?
Uh, uh, yes. I mean, the commission's been very hot on,
on this, um, for a long period of time.
Amen. Believe partly it's simply
because when you look at the Ford guidance, there's one bar
that whacks you in the face and it's the renewals bar
and it's really large
and it, it, um, as the sort of population growth slows
and its productivity slows, that bar gets larger and larger.
And the way to sort of really see that is in, uh,
smaller towns that aren't growing.
Um, uh, these asset management issues
are almost everything, if not everything.
So, um, we've been trying to highlight that, you know,
it's not always the, the sort of vogue thing to think about,
but for a sort of sophisticated asset owner, um, this is,
um, sort of the meat potatoes of,
of infrastructure if you, if you like.
Um, in terms of, um, you know,
central government infrastructure, the plan sort
of made this pretty clear the draft that, um, when it comes
to asset management process, uh, practice, um, uh,
in broad brush terms, um, you know,
commercial infrastructure seems to do pretty well.
They maintain their assets to the level you would expect
local government, and it's actually been increasing a little
bit more recently, but in the order of 80% in the,
in the dollar, maybe a little higher.
Um, and of course, um,
they've got legislative requirements to do it.
And then we point out that
for central government infrastructure, we have, uh,
cabinet circular 23 9, um, uh, which is a,
a sort of softer version of this.
And we haven't been able to assess what the level is
because there's no standard requirements to report on it.
But you mentioned Waka.
Kathi, they, um, have reported on it in the past,
and I think we, we, um, had their number, uh,
in the order of 40%.
Um, that was, that is a number that's quite old now,
a couple of years old, I'm told, um,
that it has increased since then.
Um, but it has been below a hundred percent for,
um, for some time.
Cool. Look, that takes us to the end of our hour.
Really appreciated that.
Thank you for all your answers,
and we look forward very much to the
same Minister and support team.
Welcome. Nice to have you here.
Thank you. We'll do our usual.
And I presume you might have done your usual way
of approaching this in terms of, uh, you know, a few minutes
to, to say a few things and then go to questions
unless you've got a, a wee sheet for us to Both.
Both. Okay. We'll leave it in your answer.
Well, thank you for making the time
for rail this afternoon.
We have prepared a record of our achievements in the rail
portfolio, which you can read
before we take any questions you might have.
Yep. Before we hand out that record,
which we're doing at the moment,
we note the committee has hours scheduled tomorrow
with Q Rail and Ferry Holdings.
Great. Thank you. So please reserve operational questions.
Until that time today.
We would be pleased to take questions
that are strategic in nature
and allow me please to introduce the following people.
Sue Tyndall, their new QRA chair appointed on one
July, 2025.
Chris McKenzie, the chair of Perry Holdings Limited, uh,
earlier this year, appointed Peter Reedy, sorry,
the Chief Executive of RA
and San Bruell, the new Chief executive of Perry Holdings,
who started in September this year
after nine years leading the commercial part
of City Rail Link Limited. Right. Any questions,
Colleagues? Thank you
very much, Mr. Sure. To the point. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, uh, minister for,
for your time and your written note there.
Um, just have a couple of questions to start around the,
um, the $671 million cancellation costs
c can you just confirm that that is the,
the absolute final costs in terms of the insulation aspects
of, of rx?
I can confirm that with one exception, we intend
to make greater savings of money
that looked like was going to waste.
We've already got to, uh, over 85 million,
but it will carry on and press on
and see how much more we can save
In terms of the, uh, the new contract, um, that,
that has been signed and finalized.
Um, first of all,
that's the, that's the shipyard currently building 40 ships.
Right. And
that's the sign off in the last few days.
And you intending To happy to send you copies of both
Of, of the, the, not the photos, but the, the contract.
Right. Thank you.
I'm not, I'm not sure that was these questions,
Words and words matter.
Did I hold up the contract? No.
I held up two photographs and said I'm
happy to give you the dose.
Is is it your, I try.
Is it, is it your intention to, uh, release, uh,
components of the contract that has now been stopped?
Yes. Okay. And when, when,
In the fullness of time,
What is the nature of the agreements with Center
Port and Port Marlborough for the, the next,
uh, step of arrangements?
Those are agreements currently underway
and being worked on given that they're, uh, port planning
agreements required from them both sides of the island
of the straight, uh, clearly I cannot give you the answer to
that now, but there are time dates we've set to try
and have it achieved.
And they've also in the position of course, of, um, having,
when on the borough side, on the pickton side,
a significant amount of, well, they regard as
that in the way of reserves for the purpose.
And also on this side, there are a number of, uh, savings
and adjustments being done at the moment,
which mean we cannot tell you at this point in time until
we have completed those agreements.
Okay. So they're not finalized as of
Viewed.
That's what I said. Okay. Just
Checking. Right.
Can I just, oh, I'll, I'll go next then I go.
But just, can you, um, can you walk us
through just the differences between the,
you've already alluded to some of the differences
between the IX project as it was,
and the project we're gonna get now in terms
of the scope of those projects.
I've only got half an hour here. I can be a
Week just brief.
Well, perhaps, um, would you,
one you like to answer that, would you like me? Say what?
Sorry, can you Just, the, the, the,
the difference in scope between the, um, the IX project
as was and the project which we're now gonna get.
Um, you might wanna put it in outcome terms as well
as, uh, in physical terms.
Yeah. This is not ix
No, it's a complete new project. I realize that.
Yes. And nothing that related to IX has
come into the new organization.
What I, what we have
however achieved is 80 plus million
of what was spent for IRE is now part of the new project.
So, for example, we haven't had
to do the work in the railway yards apart from some, uh,
alignment when the new vessels come.
Uh, we're not doing anything with the terminals.
Uh, we are not spending any extra money on over ramps
and so forth that would've been required, um,
had we not gone to the current location.
We've also saved a considerable amount of money
by using the same terminal, for example, in Wellington,
where you're using the Dock Wharf as a, um,
one side of the U-shape where the BER is.
So we've saved that sort of money.
We've also saved money by ensuring
that the links span in both Wellington
and Pickton are identical, so
that we don't have one port designing one sort
and the other, the other.
So we've saved money by having a, a common design
for the two links spans.
Uh, but apart from that,
there is no other carryover from ix.
Uh, it has
however, assisted us in making the internal arrangements
of the vessel easy because we haven't
had to start from scratch.
The important thing about our ships is
while our slightly smaller
and the accommodation requirements are from 18 down
to 1530, they in fact still meet the projected
growth on the ferries for the next 30 years.
So we aren't losing anything by slightly reducing,
we are gaining better environmental, um, outcomes
from the diesel electric
and the batteries that are on the vessel
and the vessels that are also being built
with the specification
that the engines can run off alternative fuels
as they become available. Okay. No, thank you. Think
So. Look and look, we,
we limited works
to the marine infrastructure, to the wolves link span,
SC protection, passenger connections.
There's a passenger building on the south side
that was gonna be pulled out.
There's no need for that.
The thing's just been put up, uh, and we retained the rail
and road yards and the buildings.
That's how we saved 2.3 billion,
2.3 billion. Okay.
Thank you, Julianne.
Um, so the, the funding that you're talking
about was never available from the Crown,
so I'm just wondering is the funding for the new fairies
and any other Associated Works, has that been appropriated?
I I, you, you ate your question at the beginning.
You said something, which I don't think,
Sorry. Um, I
think when you're talking about the savings,
you're talking about compared to an amount
that might have been needed,
but that money hadn't been appropriated.
So I'm just wondering, is the money appropriated now
for this contract for the new ferry?
Is there any other Associated Works for the,
or has it not been appropriated yet?
It's been appropriated
From the Crown, yes.
And was it part of a contingency? How, how much has been
Appropriated? No, the contingency of
the contingency of
that appropriation is 415 million is built into it.
415 million is the contingency. It's
Already built into it.
It's already built into the final figure.
So the final figure of the total cost of the ferries
and any Associated Works has already been
appropriated from central government.
Here we go. Ship contracts,
5 96, all pickling works.
Portal contributions included, 5 31
all working works, 3 25 program management
and total contingencies, four 15 total costs,
1 8, 6, 7.
Um, can I just ask, um, will the Crown
own the ships or do we know who will own
and operate the ships
Question for tomorrow?
That's a question for tomorrow.
Okay. But I'm happy to hear
you today. Sure. But I can't.
Okay. Alright, son.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, uh, minister, maybe a question for you, maybe for one
of the officials.
I see that, um, upgrading the North Auckland line is, uh,
there's been some projects completed there,
and I understand some of that was in response
to storm damage.
Uh, but, uh, the point is made that, um,
strengthen the connection to Marsden point,
uh, is important.
I'm wondering, have there been any suggestions
to upgrade the line, say between Swanson
and Kumu, uh,
to essentially help Auckland transport out its passenger
network, uh, or to upgrade it for freight purposes?
I think, uh, get Mr. Re to answer that question for you.
But can I just say, will you look at some
of the plans we've had the for,
uh, railways in this country?
Um, one of them is set for completion in,
uh, 2040 at that time it'll mean
that we'd been sitting there for a hundred years waiting
for this plan to take place.
It's that backdrop. I'm trying to set the scene
for today in terms of getting things done.
Now, uh, Mr. Reedy can perhaps answer, thank you.
Sure. We can. Um, as you know,
we're doing significant work out
innocent, but that is really,
Maybe you would just wanna come up
until the, is that alright?
That will be useful. Useful, yes. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Reedy.
Right. That line, um, uh, is, it's a
planning requirement and a,
and a decision for Auckland Transport in terms
of the passenger demand there and the services.
Um, we'll obviously respond to any of that.
Uh, we are, we are upgrading, obviously out to Henderson.
Um, but uh, it's up to Aland transport as to
how they wanna proceed, uh, further to
that, uh, Western area.
And are upgrades necessary to carry more freight, uh, say
to North Port in the future?
That, uh, WW Well, firstly, right now, um,
I know at have been talking about, uh, passenger demand.
If, uh, the, uh, port was to move to, uh, Northern, yes,
there would need to be, um, uh,
further upgraded of that line.
It's already been upgraded significantly through, uh,
through previous, um, appropriations from government.
Uh, we've updated the line from Swanson, uh, uh, right up
to Oakley, um, 18 ton x or load.
But if more freight was to come, uh, down from the port,
there'd need to be a, a,
a further work around the Western line.
Okay, thanks. Other questions, Julianne? Um,
I have some questions, minister, about provision
for passenger rail services in the future.
Uh, recently there was an announcement about a Southern line
service re commencing,
but only in a kind of tourism capacity
for a limited amount of time.
There's a lot of demand
for passenger rail services around the country.
Um, what work, if any,
is the government supporting about extending passenger rail
services for regular trips between Targa, Hamilton
and Auckland, or in the south island
between Dunedin and Christchurch?
Well, before I answer, get someone else to answer
that question, we've made a significant change to the, to
Auckland connection.
Uh, but when it comes to toga, there is the, um,
what you might call the planning
and planning impediment when it comes to the tunnel.
Okay. We've gotta get past that.
And then when you talk about the like to haves
in the South island elsewhere, it's down
to the case being made out by the locals for its need.
We are certainly enthusiastic,
but the case has gotta be made, right? Correct.
I can add to that minister. Yeah. Thank you.
Uh, the, uh, in addition to the man, the minister has said,
um, the case does need to be made.
And in a lot of those scenarios, that case needs to be made
by the regional councils that are involved.
Uh, and Kiwi Rail would then be, um, supportive of,
we have required, the case has not yet been made.
Were you happy to take
further detailed questions on that tomorrow? Could
It be difficult for the regional councils to be planning
for long-term passenger services,
given the government's just announced?
So looking at getting rid of the regional councils,
It just might be different people
Who might, I mean, it's just kind of a barrier.
Well, look, I, whatever that impression is based on
it is not the, um, in the wick
of all these very talented railway people
to start answering questions about local government.
Surely you understand that.
I, I guess I'm asking you as the Minister for Rail,
do you see a role for central government in planning
intercity passenger rail services
and making the case for them or no?
Look, um, I, uh,
have looked back ever since a man called Vogel
had the inspiration to build in 10 years,
but it took another 130 years to build.
And we are about to announce a new type
of Vogel era when it comes from Zealand
railways. You stand back and watch.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Mr.
Have you been on the capital connection service?
Yes. When, When,
Yes.
You hesitation, that's,
That's what you gotta ask, don't you?
Now, the low and all island
and mobility, uh, integrated project, which my colleague Mr.
Ulti and I obviously supportive
of the government's continuation
to increase services along the mantu and the RA lines.
It wasn't, but there was a, um, a suggestion
that there could be some delays
because of the need to upgrade some of the level crossings.
What is your expectation is rail minister around, uh,
ensuring that that's, that the government sticks
to the rollout of those two additional services?
Well, um, probably more problem me to,
uh, answer that question.
We are seriously enthusiastic about the wire wrap line,
about the, um, delivery of its service in a punctual fashion
with the provisions going forward for its efficiency,
likewise for the man two, uh, we, we are seeing to turn
around people's, the mentality of the Zealand population, so
to speak, but more the mentality of Wellington
or do I say parliament about
the efficacy of rail going forward?
It's a no brainer and we are gonna put our best efforts into
it, but we can't just answer that question by telling you
how much today and when tomorrow we're gonna do what, what,
but do we believe in railways
and the, um, the use of it as an alternative
for transport system or as, uh,
alternative cargo movement system?
Of course we do.
Mr. Chair. Um, my understanding is
that the greater Wellington Regional Council has been
informed that significant investment is needed, uh,
in the Wellington Regional lines to ensure
that commuter services can
continue to improve in the future.
Are you able to tell us how much investment is needed
and if the government is funding that?
Um, do you wanna answer that? I can, yes. Yeah,
So, um, take a couple of questions.
Um, maybe the first one from a palm to north.
So rum, uh, we have done the scoping, uh, in July, um,
detailed design and, and procurement methodologies underway.
Um, and that scope includes significant
level crossing signaling.
On, on, on the question you answered, uh,
we've also had 172 million,
I think in the y wrapper area in terms of level,
level crossing signaling.
There's 30 level crossing improvements to be done.
Um, and, and 21 have been achieved to date.
Um, in terms of the Wellington, um, metro area, um,
there has been significant investment from the government in
terms of, uh, the work we've been done.
Um, there, there are, there are, um,
there's investment required for the historic upgrades.
Uh, and we are working through that, uh,
with Greater Wellington Regional Council.
We've gotta combine risk assessment in terms of
what would be required for that.
Can you tell us what that is? Is that publicly available?
No, it's, it's, it's, we are working through
that currently with, uh, uh, greater Wellington and all and,
and as part of our budget that's coming up,
there'll be an element that will be put in for that.
I've got a, speaking of
heritage, I have a heritage question.
So the mat railway station, uh, as mentioned on the,
on your list, uh, here, which I know
that you put some money towards.
Um, I, we passed it the other day
and it looks like the work I think is just underway.
Angus. Yeah. Which is great.
Um, is there a program which is gonna follow on from that
and, uh, that you are, um, supporting in terms
of other older railway stations?
You talked about Julius Vogel, some of those have been
around not quite as long, but close,
Close.
Um, and, but some of 'em need a little bit of TLC.
I went down to there and I really, it's quite sad
to think there's this great part
of the country making enormous contribution
to this country's export wealth.
Uh, and our total funding for that, that sort of operation
was less than $101,000.
So we've improved that quite remark.
It's nothing spectacular, but we've taken it
to half a million might so that these projects can be done.
And, uh, I think when it's over,
people will be enormously
grateful for the fact we've done it.
It's gonna cost peanuts to restore their heritage,
but also as a major tourism attraction
in the left part of the country.
And there I said the south island is more than pulling its
weight in the economy right here, right now. Indeed,
Indeed. We saw a
couple of nice stations on the west coast
just last week, Steve.
Right. Other questions folks?
Can I ask a question about freight?
Obviously, you know, moving freight around is, is vital,
but what we are seeing in terms of the trend is
that freight volumes seem to be decreasing.
Um, the current capacity of, uh,
island doesn't have a rail enabled fer right now
until the new ferry, um, arrives.
Are you concerned about the decreasing trend in terms of,
um, the, the volume of freight being used, uh,
being transported along rail?
And if so, what's gonna happen to try and mitigate?
Um, that i, I concern?
Yeah, so, uh, maybe Pete Peter
Should just stay, just stay there.
It's easy. No, stay here. Stay here. Yeah,
Sorry. Um,
Can I answer that question?
The freight volumes in the last year increased 2.7% over
previous year, um, which very concentrated customer base.
Uh, we had significant volume uplift from dairy, uh, from,
uh, forestry Timberlands in particular, um,
from alliance meats, um, and coal
and, uh, all three exported commodities, you know,
grew with rail last year.
Uh, we've also seen an increase in, uh,
freight forwarding domestic freight.
Uh, for example, one
of our larger customers is 18% up on this time last year.
So we're actually seeing an uplift.
Um, whilst last year was a tough economy,
we did see road volumes come back 1%.
So last year was a good turnaround, uh, led by, um,
uh, there's an improvement in reliability, uh,
improvement in the track condition.
Uh, we're getting speed, um,
reductions outta the track, which is good.
And we're getting a consistent reliability for customers.
We've gone from 65% di default,
which is delivery in full on time to 90,
over 90% in the last four months.
Uh, and all of our customers can start,
start to see a change.
There's lots to do. Um,
and the new locomotives haven't come in yet.
There's only two on service.
So once we get those 65 in,
we'll have more capacity for the freight market.
So we are very positive about leaning in
and fighting hard, um, with our roading partners
for a better transport system.
About the lack of rail enablement
on the ferries at the moment. Yeah,
It's, it's actually, um, uh, we are road bridge
yet obviously, uh, we'll put a new timetable in place.
Uh, we are turning the ships around in the time requirement.
Um, it's a, we know it's a short term game.
Uh, yes, it's more double handling.
Uh, but we've been planning for this.
We know it's been coming, uh,
and the teams have actually done a great job.
Uh, we are in peak now, so it does put constraints on us.
Uh, but uh, as of now we've been, uh,
getting the freight timetables on the ships.
Can I ask about, um,
main trunk electrification and electrification?
Julian, can I just make sure we're asking the minister the
questions because we get a chance to do that later wrong?
Sure. Main trunk electrification.
I believe there was a business case
that was being completed.
I'm just wondering if the government has any intention
to carry on with that investment.
Is that, does the minister see that as something
that is important as part of the future
of New Zealand's railways?
We see all smart futuristic planning to do
with New Zealand railways as important for the future.
Uh, I think, I think it's gonna be, uh, well
amongst other things, it's a very
exciting portfolio to have.
Really it is 'cause we're gonna bring it alive
and we've got other plans I can't announce here, uh,
to give better injection of investment into railways,
not necessarily from government.
Now I'm not gonna say any more than that,
but that's where to look at
because this is gonna have a massive payback into the future
and it's very sound investment to make.
So, uh, yes, electrification will, will continue,
but again, it's gotta be, uh mm-hmm.
Other priorities sorted out first or at the same time.
Um, could using like battery electric hybrid trains,
like are being ordered for the Wellington region be a way
around the issues with the Kamai tunnel to extend
to Hya to toga?
I can answer that can answer. I
Can answer That can answer. Yeah. Um,
look, it's, it's, it's great that, um,
stom have been delivered a solution for battery electric
for, uh, for the, uh,
regional commuter in the freight market.
It's very different. There was not now an electric battery
option on the market.
Uh, Queensland Rail have, uh, have proposed something.
Queensland Rail have just turned off a $19 million
project on electrification.
It's quite difficult in the market in terms of, uh,
battery and electric.
And I've just been at the um, full rail conference.
There's a couple of players out there looking for it
and there's starting to be a more
of a demand for it at the moment.
Europe's all electric.
Um, we would, uh, you know, as we look at our fleet
for the future, it'll be something
that we obviously would look at if the customer will will
pay for that, that increase.
And also we know our 50%
of our emissions in the golden triangle.
Mm-hmm. So it should certainly an area that makes sense
to look at what are the options in the business case.
And we've been doing a lot of work on that,
but it's globally quite challenging for
that particular technology at the moment.
But it is coming.
One question, one last question from me anyway.
Um, just you've mentioned also the, uh, in your note here,
the progress work on the master, uh, point rail link.
Do you have a rough timeframe for how long that's gonna be?
'cause obviously that unlocks,
even the knowing it's gonna happen will unlock a lot
of investment in that, uh, in that
that we visited the other day.
Yes, we did.
Well, the precise answer to that is we are out,
up against, uh, critical decisions that must be made
for the 2026 budget on that matter.
We are very conscious of that.
We know that we've gone out to fine in 2020.
We found five over 400 million
for the year later of that connection.
And, uh, we know it can be far less than the billion
of others we're forecasting it to be.
But we've gotta find a precise figure, possibly
slightly north of seven 50, uh, seven 50 million to do it.
Uh, so it's, I need
to find another 300 2300 $50 million in the 2026
budget and we're on our way.
But, uh, as in all things where treasury is concerned,
you're out defending what you rightly have against wrongful,
uh, claims of priority.
Whilst we are seeking to find the further investment, uh,
to ensure that that railway can go ahead
and, uh, we do not mean to fail
Treasury are well aware of the economic impacts
of, uh, delivering
No, they're very well the
political impacts if they do not.
Karen, I think you had a question. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Minister,
and for your team for making yourselves vulnerable today.
Mr. Peters, uh, um, 671 million costs
to the cancellation, uh, has been noted and covered widely.
Do you think that would've been a lower amount
or indeed avoided at all if you were made minister at the
start as parliamentary term?
Oh, I can't answer questions like that.
Give it a go. When the, we deal
with a thing called real politic.
We deal with things that do happen, not things that,
not things that didn't happen, uh,
but at, when I known, I saw that previous too,
because it's May of 2020, I have asked them to go
and find two ferries for $401 million.
When I saw what was exploding
after that, I couldn't, I
couldn't understand what had gone wrong.
So we went from 401 $1 million to find two ferries
to come back to find.
Yeah, they had found two ferries, right?
But much bigger ferries.
And as a consequence of that, uh,
and other decision making, it was almost like,
here's the chance we can make a fortune out of this, uh,
plan for New Zealand railways.
The price in the end was a case
where the ferries were gonna cost 20%
or less than the total cost.
That's, uh, how I felt when I came back in 2023
and saw what had gone on.
Um, but it's no, you know,
pointing fingers anywhere else other than to say, uh,
how shall I say the figure of six,
600 million plus ignores.
The fact that it, substantial amounts of
that was wasted on consultancy and all sort of expenditure.
There's nothing to show for it.
And what we've been able to save, we have saved,
we're past 85 million now.
I think we're gonna get past a hundred million in time on
this, but, uh, all up, it's not the first time I saw it.
Look, remember Transmission Gully sitting there in
2018 and it's gone broke.
I'm sitting in a cabinet to be told by the, the um,
officials at the time we got no more money
for Transmission Gully.
Do you remember to, uh, to walk with
what a massive blowout that was
and a time delay that was so
that if we went on this timescale of that to walk with,
we were gonna take another 89 years to make re
That's what's gone wrong with the Zealand.
And I'm not just blaming, uh, the previous government.
I've seen an countless governments,
the only thing ones I can remember is the recent ment
bridge, uh, with was case they built it on time.
And the second tower on Harbor Bridge
was, is on time and under budget.
That's all work can remember the last 40 years.
Well, the rest has been a total blowout everywhere.
Thank you minister for acknowledging
that Cora Mandel Bridge, that bridge
has been a life saver for their community.
It's inspiration And it is often overlooked as a,
as a great achievement by those
that were involved in a very short period of time.
And it's the first time the minister
of this government has acknowledged that.
So I just wanted to thank you.
Well, I'm happy to because I want more of that.
Very good. Um, Julianne, you have
One last question?
Um, yeah, I, sorry, I didn't think I was gonna get it, so.
No, you got it. Yep. Um, I just, I was just wondering,
following up on what, um,
the Honorable Kieran McNulty just asked, um,
with any improvements that are needed for the Wharfs,
the Wharfs, will that be funded from central government
or will it be funded from somewhere else?
Look, the beauty of this is
That you've got participants in the, uh,
projects going forward who are gonna be charging
for the ferries to come and go on a daily, hourly basis.
And they will be paying for both the,
those operations week fund themselves and their investment.
Plus in over the 30 year period, the ferries will be able
to pay for them for the rebuild of the next one.
That's what the plan based is on.
So their job is to actually efficiently run the operation,
reasonably charged and fairly charged.
And, uh, and as a con, as a consequence,
they'll be paying their, their fair share
and both sides of the, um, look straight,
the councils recognize that.
So rather than the government funding the infrastructure
upfront, which was the previous proposal, it will be
approved through users over the time. No,
It wasn't proposal. And
a question, two questions back.
You said there wasn't a visa, the previous proposal,
you said they hadn't put any money aside for it
and which is it, they hadn't put any money aside
that you said to questions ago or now they had
Well, I mean, the current government didn't say yes
to the proposal to appropriate more
Money, so they had to put the money aside. Yeah,
but I guess, I guess the, can we count it
as savings if it's still being paid for
by users over this lifetime and the use of the
Well, of course, of course the user's gonna pay in the end
because the user's gonna get a very efficient service.
Okay, Well we're not, we're not offering,
not offering free transport here.
We are offering world class efficient competitive pricing.
Yes, the consumer should be very happy.
These ferries will be nothing like nothing we've seen
before here, latest scale
and most modern scale in terms of maritime safety.
They have all sorts of utilities on the piece.
One haven't got, they're, um, self-sufficient.
Should they have an engine problem, being able
to rescue the, to rescue themselves
from their own circumstance.
So yeah, these, these are, they state of the art,
what they're standard of the art for what we're looking to
get.
I don't see any other questions.
So on that note, thank you very much all
for your time, minister.
We'll see.